+++
title="Hacker Folklore"
date=2020-04-10
draft=true
+++

All too often, we use terminology without knowing its origin. The etymology of
computer terms can be fascinating and entertaining. This post tries to collect
the surprising history of computing terms we use every day.

## Well-known examples

**Spam**

The term goes back to a sketch by British comedy group Monty Python from 1970.
In the sketch, a cafe is including
[Spam](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spam_(food)) (a brand of canned cooked
pork) in almost every dish. The excessive amount of Spam mentioned is a
reference to the ubiquity of it and other imported canned meat products in the
UK after World War II (a period of rationing in the UK) as the country struggled
to rebuild its agricultural base. Today, the term also refers to unsolicited
electronic communications, for example by sending mass-emails or posting in
forums and chats. [Reference](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spamming#History)

**C++**

C++ is a programming language based on C by Bjarne Stroustrup. The name is a
programmer pun by Rick Mascitti, a coworker of Stroustrup. The `++` refers to
the post-increment operator, that is common in many C-like languages. It
increases the value of a variable by 1. In that sense, C++ can be seen as the
spiritual "successor" of C.

[Reference](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C%2B%2B#History)

**C#**

Similarly to C++, C# is a C-like programming language. The name again refers to
"incremental" improvements on top of C++. The `#` in the name looks like four
plus signs. Hence `C# == (C++)++`. But on top of that, the name was also
inspired by the musical notation where a sharp indicates that the written note
should be made a semitone higher in pitch.
[Reference](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C_Sharp_(programming_language)#Name)


**PNG**

Officially, PNG stands for *Portable Network Graphics*. It was born out of
frustration over a CompuServe announcement in 1994 that programs supporting GIF
would have to pay licensing fees from now on. A working group lead by hacker
[Thomas Boutell](https://boutell.dev/) created the `.png` file format, a
patent-free replacement for GIF. Therefore I prefer the format's unofficial
name: *PNG's Not GIF*.

[Reference](https://encyclopedia2.thefreedictionary.com/PNG%27s+Not+GIF) [Great
article on PNG's
history](https://people.apache.org/~jim/NewArchitect/webrevu/1997/05_09/designers/05_09_97_1.html)


## 404

## Log

## Bikeshed

**Useless discussion about trivial issues **

The law has been applied to software development and other activities.The term
bike-shed effect or bike-shedding was coined as a metaphor to illuminate the law
of triviality; it was popularised in the Berkeley Software Distribution
community by the Danish computer developer Poul-Henning Kamp in 1999[3] and has
spread from there to the whole software industry.

The concept was first presented as a corollary of his broader "Parkinson's law"
spoof of management. He dramatizes this "law of triviality" with the example of
a committee's deliberations on an atomic reactor, contrasting it to
deliberations on a bicycle shed. As he put it: "The time spent on any item of
the agenda will be in inverse proportion to the sum of money involved." A
reactor is so vastly expensive and complicated that an average person cannot
understand it, so one assumes that those who work on it understand it. On the
other hand, everyone can visualize a cheap, simple bicycle shed, so planning one
can result in endless discussions because everyone involved wants to add a touch
and show personal contribution.

Sources:

- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Law_of_triviality
- (History behind the original bikeshed email on the FreeBSD mailing
  list)[http://phk.freebsd.dk/sagas/bikeshed.html]

## Boilerplate

**A chunk of code that is copied over and over again with little or no changes
made to it in the process.**

"Boiler plate" originally referred to the rolled steel used to make water
boilers but is used in the media to refer to hackneyed or unoriginal writing.
The term refers to the metal printing plates of pre-prepared text such as
advertisements or syndicated columns that were distributed to small, local
newspapers. These printing plates came to be known as 'boilerplates' by analogy.
One large supplier to newspapers of this kind of boilerplate was the Western
Newspaper Union, which supplied "ready-to-print stories [which] contained
national or international news" to papers with smaller geographic footprints,
which could include advertisements pre-printed next to the conventional content.

Sources:

- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boilerplate_text
- https://stackoverflow.com/a/3997441/270334

## Bug

** A defect in a piece of code or hardware**

One of the most well-known ones. Contrary to popular belief it predates the bug
found by Grace Hopper in the Mark II computer.

The term "bug" to describe defects has been a part of engineering jargon since
the 1870s and predates electronic computers and computer software; it may have
originally been used in hardware engineering to describe mechanical
malfunctions.

Sources:

- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_bug#Etymology

## Firmware

**A class of computer software that provides the low-level control for the
device's specific hardware**

Ascher Opler coined the term "firmware" in a 1967 Datamation article. As
originally used, firmware contrasted with hardware (the CPU itself) and software
(normal instructions executing on a CPU). It existed on the boundary between
hardware and software; thus the name "firmware".

Sources:

- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Firmware

## Foo & Bar

\*\*When a programmer quickly needs a placeholder variable name, sometimes the
terms "foo" and "bar" are used.

There's a much longer list on
[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_computer_term_etymologies)

## Patch

Bugs are fixed with patches.

## Radio Button

https://twitter.com/themattcoady/status/988819505534009344

## i18n

Number of letters between the i and the n. Same for kubernetes (k8s) and
localization (l10n)

### Mac’s Command ⌘ And Option ⌥ Symbols

The ⌘ symbol came into the Macintosh project at a late stage. The development
team originally went for their old Apple key, but Steve Jobs found it
frustrating when "apples" filled up the Mac's menus next to the key commands,
because he felt that this was an over-use of the company logo.[3] He then opted
for a different key symbol. With only a few days left before deadline, the
team's bitmap artist Susan Kare started researching for the Apple logo's
successor. She was browsing through a symbol dictionary when she came across the
cloverleaf-like symbol, commonly used in Nordic countries as an indicator of
cultural locations and places of interest[2][6] (it is the official road sign
for tourist attraction in Denmark, Finland,[7] Iceland,[8] Norway,[9] and
Sweden,[10] and the computer key has often been called Fornminne — ancient
monument — by Swedish Mac users[11] and Seværdighedstegn by Danish users). When
she showed it to the rest of the team, everyone liked it, and so it became the
symbol of the 1984 Macintosh command key.[12][6] Susan Kare states that it has
since been told to her that the symbol had been picked for its Scandinavian
usage due to its resembling the shape of a square castle with round corner
towers as seen from above looking down, notably Borgholm Castle.[6]

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Command_key

https://www.cultofmac.com/181495/what-are-the-macs-command-%E2%8C%98-and-option-%E2%8C%A5-symbols-supposed-to-represent/

## Ship it

## Uppercase and lowercase

# Similar Projects

- (awesome-computer-history)[https://github.com/watson/awesome-computer-history]
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_computer_term_etymologies
